---
title: Evaluation of the Global Leaf Area Index Argument
layout: default
nav_order: 1
---


The Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change (henceforth, CSCDGC) website provides commentary on papers pertaining to consequences of CO<sub>2</sub> rise (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2021). A perusal through the articles presented makes it clear that this site highlights skepticism towards the harm of greenhouse gas emissions, as well as what are identified as benefits of atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> increases. One of the site’s most recent posts from January 2021 is titled, “CO<sub>2</sub> Fertilization Effects on Global Leaf Area Index” (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2021). Amount of foliage in a plant canopy is quantified using Leaf Area Index (LAI), as it is a driving force of water and nutrient use, carbon balance, and net primary production (Jørgensen and Fath, 2008), which is defined as the net carbon gain by plants (Holland and Turekian, 2014). The paper that CSCDGC first references in this article is a study by Wang et al. from 2017, which invoked the use of climate and soil variables and the Farquhar's biochemical model to reconstruct global LAI, and it is from this that increases in global LAI were related to increased atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> (Wang, Chen and Wang, 2020). Wang et. al concluded that it is sufficient to use Farquhar's biochemical model to estimate the effect of CO<sub>2</sub> fertilization on the global trend in LAI, and potentially simulate global LAI for future prognostic modeling (Wang, Chen and Wang, 2020). What is interesting is that the scientific basis is quite strong in this CSCDGC article in contrast to many other arguments against anthropogenic climate change as a major threat; however, after detailed investigation of the literature, it became apparent that the conclusions of CSCDGC were made in the absence of critical consideration of the implications of increased greenery on Earth.  
The CSCDGC portrayal of these findings is that the observed increase in global LAI due to rising atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> is exclusively a positive phenomenon, as best illustrated by the statement, “Atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub>, it's not the demon so many make it out to be. Rather, it's the elixir of life” (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2021). This observation of increased LAI due to increased CO<sub>2</sub> was also indicated by NASA; however, they clarify that carbon dioxide fertilization explains 70% of the increased LAI, and that nitrogen contributes to 9% of this effect. In addition, NASA indicates that some studies demonstrate that plants adjust to the rising carbon dioxide concentration, and that this fertilization effect will be reduced with time (Hille, 2016). 
While the range of costs and benefits of the rising LAI phenomenon is not completely understood and models of this process are continuously revised (Hille, 2016), the conclusion made by CSCDGC lacks complete evidence. While it is true that forests benefit from higher atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> levels due to trees being able to use less water and photosynthesize more, the resultant increases in global temperatures that comes with increased atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> causes trees to use more water and photosynthesize less (Sperry et al., 2019). A physiologically realistic model demonstrated that in the case that forests fail to adjust to rising temperatures, only 55% of climate projections predict a CO<sub>2</sub> increase large enough to prevent warming from causing widespread death by drought (Sperry et al., 2019). In other words, this increase in greenery is only one side of the CO<sub>2</sub> coin, and greater consideration is necessary for processes surrounding the increase in LAI. 
It is true that the author of the CSCDGC article has identified and cited a relation between atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> levels and the increase in foliage in forests worldwide; however, the conclusion that CO<sub>2</sub> is solely improving our ecosystems is a hasty generalization that fails to account for the role that CO<sub>2</sub> plays in the rise in global temperatures, and the effects that this could have on the sustainability of forests worldwide.  

References

Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change, 2021. CO2 Fertilization Effects on Global Leaf Area Index. [online] CO2 Science. Available at: <http://www.co2science.org/articles/V24/jan/a5.php> [Accessed 6 Feb. 2021].
Hille, K., 2016. Carbon Dioxide Fertilization Greening Earth, Study Finds. [Text] NASA. Available at: <http://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2016/carbon-dioxide-fertilization-greening-earth> [Accessed 6 Feb. 2021].
Holland, H.D. and Turekian, K.K., 2014. Treatise on Geochemistry. [online] Available at: <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/referenceworks/9780080983004> [Accessed 6 Feb. 2021].
Jørgensen, S.E. and Fath, B.D., 2008. Encyclopedia of Ecology. Amsterdam; Boston: Elsevier.
Sperry, J.S., Venturas, M.D., Todd, H.N., Trugman, A.T., Anderegg, W.R.L., Wang, Y. and Tai, X., 2019. The impact of rising CO2 and acclimation on the response of US forests to global warming. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(51), pp.25734–25744.
Wang, M., Chen, J.M. and Wang, S., 2020. Reconstructing the Seasonality and Trend in Global Leaf Area Index During 2001–2017 for Prognostic Modeling. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 125(9), p.e2020JG005698.

